I need to think about this carefully, how you're wired, okay? So, why is it that we are lazy as an example? What's the upside of us being lazy? Save energy. Okay, say that you did You know that thing that makes you not want to get up? Now, if you let it dominate you, that's bad. But if you didn't have it at all, what would happen? You'd be like this. You do that, and then you would And then you'd be like 130 lb, 120 lb, 90 lb, 50 lb, and you'd die. It's an energy blocker so that you only You'll only use your energy if you think it's super duper important. Okay, so what's meant to happen as a human being? You're meant to be put into this prehistoric environment where you would come into perfect equilibrium with that environment. You follow this? You would be in perfect equilibrium with that environment. Because what you do is you'd only start burning energy in places where you really needed to. So, if you were to live in you know, in the forest, you would have a general rhythm of life. You'd probably go to bed around the same time every day. You'd probably wake up around the same time every day. You'd go hunt at certain times. You'd go get fruits and vegetables at certain times. You actually It it probably be a little bit easier. You're You would You would eventually come into equilibrium with it. But what happens in modern And also, you wouldn't have to write everything down because you wouldn't have as many things to remember. So, you wouldn't have to write everything down. You wouldn't have to worry about say flaking with people who you meet up with who you'd like to link up with because they'd be in the same cave person tribe as you. You ever have you meet somebody out and it went amazing, but then, you know, it just doesn't go so good over text message or over the phone? You wouldn't have that problem cuz they'd keep seeing you. Also, you wouldn't have the problem of them seeing how amazing you are because they'd see you all the time. So, they'd see who's the leader and who's not the leader. They'd be seeing it ongoing. You wouldn't have to go approach anybody or attract anybody. They would just either think you're good or you're not based on what they're seeing on an ongoing basis. So, there'd be all of these different things that are being handled. Another one of these things is the law of investment and not wanting a sunk cost. So, imagine that you're a prehistoric person and you built some little house or, you know, you decorated your cave or maybe you hunted an animal, and then that animal is sitting there on the ground. Now, if you use a whole bunch of time and energy Say the word time and energy. Time and energy. Okay, so if you use some that time and energy to go and hunt that animal or to decorate your cave or whatever it is, what happens if you're the kind of person where you go kill an animal or you go decorate your cave, but then you just walk away from it? What is that going to do to you? As far as your survival. It's not a good way to go down. Yeah, your chance of survival goes way, way down. So, we have this instinct in us. A, don't use energy unless you absolutely have to. And then nature will bring that into equilibrium. Likewise, don't give up on an investment. Don't Don't allow sunk costs to occur is another really, really big one. Okay, if you invest into something, don't walk away from it. That's another autopilot response. It's hardwired into us. So, um And again, the other really, really big one is you don't need to write anything down because you'd be living in equilibrium, so you wouldn't have to write anything down. All of a sudden, we live in modern society. Oh, here's another one. If you find a big beehive thing with a bunch of honey, EAT ALL OF IT NOW. Shove your face now. Winter's coming. Put on that extra 30 before winter comes, right? So, we These were instincts that we had. Now, all of a sudden, you get into modern society, and what happens? You get in this reality where people who have a brain that is able to be a little bit more active and realize certain things, those people dominate and other people fail. So, many of the people who would at a prehistoric time would absolutely dominate, many of those people The people who'd be just crushing it in the prehistoric era, many of them are addicted to drugs and flat broke and living in abject poverty. And many people who might have not even been doing that well, if they can if they can evolve certain parts of their mind, they can actually hit another level. So, let me give a couple examples. Take with writing things down. Your brain isn't meant to remember everything. There is no way you can balance all of this. Do you understand that? Your brain's not wired to remember all this. It's not. You have to write things down. You have to set little alarms all the time. You should be setting multiple alarms for anything that's important. If I have an important phone call to make I do I do a lot of one-on-one coaching with guys that are very wealthy. I have three alarms. I have one that goes off an hour before, one that goes off 15 minutes before, one that goes off a minute before. I want to be texting them, you know, I'll text them a half an hour before to say, "Hey, see you in half an hour. Hey, see you in 15." And then ready. And I want to write that word ready 1 minute before the time that they said. Without that alarm, do you want to know what kind of things happen? And I've learned this. Oh, IT'S NOT GOOD. OH, NO, NOT GOOD. OH, NO, NO, NO, not good. Because you could just burn a half a million dollar a year income funnel in one mistake. Because people that are very wealthy, how much tolerance do they have to mistakes like that? What do you think? Zero. Zero. Because they value their time. They've learned Even somebody who's amazing, if they're going to be like that, you can't work with them because they're they're going to they're going to wreck your whole thing. They're like, you know, you could be the best coach in the world, but if you're going to act like that, they can't work with you. Um you know, they'll they'll usually give you a little BIT OF LEVERAGE HERE or there, like you're a human, but it's very, very rare. So, I've had it where I could have, you know, I could literally just burn a $300,000 a year income source by failing to have one alarm set. And that's really happened to me. Like that's Imagine you miss an alarm and you just burn a $300,000 income funnel. Do you know what that feels like? Suffering [ __ ] Yeah, I I need therapy. It's a It's It's like It's horrific. So, things like that can happen. Or you could trust your staff to maybe do something for them. And then you And then you you called your staff 20 times and please remember, please remember, please remember, but they don't set those alarms, and then they forget, and then you're like, They had a thousand dollars. And they're like, "Oh, sorry." You know, and then there's nothing you can do. They're just like, "Sorry, bro." That's it. There's nothing you can do, right? Yeah. And the way the laws work, if you were to get mad at them, they could sue you. But it doesn't matter. Like Like Like there's laws against somebody going into a bank, putting a gun there, and robbing 30,000 and costing that bank 30,000. But if you had a staff that cost you 300,000, you just have to grit your teeth and say, you know, that that's that's that's literally all that you can do. So, you not only have to be responsible for you At a high level, you not only have to be responsible for yourself, you have to be responsible for the people around you and not allow them to make mistakes either. And you have to have systems put in place. Your brain is not meant to remember almost anything. You And And I mean, I don't drink. I don't smoke weed. I eat a lot of things are nutritious. I can't remember anything that I see. I remember almost nothing because none of you do. None of you remember anything. None of you remember anything. Nobody remembers anything. Nobody does because that's not how we're wired. So, people who get ahead, they write things down. They They continually write things down. They make success inevitable. So, whenever I have different ideas, you know, if you were to look inside my computer and I'm and I'm having different ideas about videos that I'm going to create, those videos are not going to come for me to me always in just one giant flash. Those are going to come to me over time. So, if I have a thing like this, that's That's probably That could be written over a week. You know, all little ideas that I have, and then I'm jotting them down in my phone, in my laptop. And then you'll see me sit down, and then I start shaping them and sorting them out and organizing them and testing them in different sequences, and then doing little rehearsals and seeing what's going to go where and how to unpack different ideas where, and so on and so forth, to get to the point where then I can become like what you saw yesterday, where right off the dome, I've got this sequence thing out that I've built for you. Okay, that's if I'm doing a tighter type of content that I do at paid events. At my free events, I go improvised in most cases. I actually went off the laptop at this event here in New York, which is very rare for me. But in 99% of them, I do I do improvise. But for something structured, that's how I do it. And I do that in my paid events. They're very structured. They're very dense. So, again, let's look over this. The mind is not wired to what? Remember. To remember anything. How do you beat that? Write it down. What else? Set alarms. Set alarms, okay? Likewise, the mind does not want to lose what? Energy. En- energy, okay? So, knowing that, we have to learn how to motivate ourselves. This is a major, major factor. And I know all of you are feeling this. You're all feeling this. You're You're thinking, "There's so many different cool things that I could be doing, but I don't do them because I can't spark up that dopamine and make myself do it." And you feel like you're in a haze. I remember being a kid and knowing that I'd get in trouble if I didn't do my homework. And there was these two shows in the '80s. One was called Family Ties. Another one was Cheers. Another one was Growing Pains. And actually, the father of Robin Thicke was the star of that, funny enough. A guy named Alan Thicke. So, I I remember being a kid and I'd have math homework, and I know that I'm going to I know that I'm going to get shamed, and I'm going to get in trouble, and all these problems are going to happen the next day at school if I don't do it. And I I used to sit there thinking, "Why can't I make myself do this? It's weird. I know that tomorrow, like, whatever upside I'm going to get from watching Family Ties and Cheers, as good as cuz I like them. They're good. But whatever upside that I'm going to get is not nearly matching the downside that I'm going to feel tomorrow, where I'm nervous on my on my way to school. I'm nervous in my class. I feel low self-esteem me my class. The whole thing sucks. and I'm going to have a problem with that. But, I'd still not do it, and I'd still be a failing student. And then it would mess with my self-esteem. And so, do you realize how much your self-esteem is being messed with because of this energy thing? This one simple area of not knowing how to motivate yourself is going to be messing with your self-esteem and your self-confidence in ways that you can't even begin to imagine. Most of you here have incredible talents, incredible gifts. You're smart. You're interested in content like this, so clearly you want to go a lot deeper. You have a higher standard life, but you know that you're just failing on this ongoing basis. So, that's the same thing as firing up your energy. Another one is investment. We don't want to give up on a sunk cost. Now, you might have had this where maybe you're dating somebody and you're super obsessed with them, and because you're obsessed with them, you don't want to let them go and you keep doubling down. You ever done that? Maybe you meet somebody on a night out and you put some time in with them, and you're afraid to allow the sunk cost to go. Maybe you have an employee who you trained and you put so much time into training them, they become more and more toxic, demanding, and disruptive, but you've doubled down, tripled down, 10x down, and you don't want to let it go. You're too afraid to let go the sunk cost. You keep looking at the history and at your hopes for that friendship or relationship or business situation, your hopes for it. You're not willing to see it for what it is today. What is this situation today? What could this situation be? And realizing it's not what it is anymore. Even most of my old friends, if we're being honest, I've had to rediscover the value in those friendships and find new forms of value because people do change. Think about that. Take me and Julian and our friendship as an example. That has tremendously evolved. What do you think me and Julian's friendship was based on a decade ago? Very different things than it was today. Right? Uh you know, our lifestyle back then was we were in Hollywood clubs five to seven nights a week. We were going out. We were like, you know, the biggest little trolls and having fun and doing all this crazy stuff and basically just like pretty much our day-to-day mentality was how can we be the biggest idiots known to man? Like, this like how can we be bigger idiots? Like, how can we just be the biggest idiots in the entire world? It was pretty much, you know, we would we would just tease each other, make fun of each other, cloud each other, go out to the bar and then do that to everybody else. And that's pretty much what we were doing, right? Until it got maybe got a lot of hand. So then, you know, so that was our friendship then. Julian now is a married man. He likes to be at home with his children. He's he's not somebody who's intensely money driven at all. He makes amazing money. He knows a lot about business. He's done millions in launches. He does millions in sales, but he's not a money driven person. So, my and his friendship is based on things like joint projects or things that we're doing together or um you know, how we can combine our talents synergistically in order to create something that we couldn't make individually. Does that make sense? Like, what can him and I do cuz we don't need to work together. There's no need for him and I to work together, but how can we how can we join forces synergistically to where, you know, if he had made it here today, we do a lot of events together. Let's say he'd made it here today, he could have presented ideas about trauma healing, about energetic stuff, and then maybe I could be presenting ideas about social skills or making money and it presents a full picture. Now, I'll show you a lot of the same things that he would have showed you. And if you if you're in an event with Julian, he'd show you a lot of things that I would have showed you. But when him and I can each work on it individually and we can bounce off of each other creatively, there's some good synergy there. Right? So, we've redefined that friendship. Does this make sense? So, it's one of those things where uh you know, you have to be able to redefine what it is uh you know, that you're getting the value out of anything and not just have a sunk cost, okay? Like, if I have an ex-girlfriend, I have to redefine with her where's the value in that. Does this make sense? So, I'm continually auditing where is the actual value. I have no fear to cut something off if I can see that it has changed. You want to know why that is? Because I've stayed in those situations way too long and I've seen what the consequences are of it. But people have that thing where they're afraid to lose their investment. They're terrified. Most of you in here are more afraid um of losing money than you are to go out and make it. That's the truth. You're you're more you're more upset about that. I saw this with people that I was partnered up with where uh they would start in-fighting and I said, "Listen, um you know, because there was there was some like really bad in-fighting that went on in my company. You guys might have seen a little bit about that. It was really shitty. It was like probably the most horrible thing ever. And I'm trying to I'm trying to like mediate that. And I'm like, "Yo, if you stop working with me, you're going to lose hundreds of millions over the course of your career. And if you stop working with me, you're going to lose hundreds of millions over the course of your career. So, are you willing each literally over what you each perceive as you know, a you know, a dispute over maybe a million, are you really willing to lose a potential 999 million over the next 30 years? Because I'm doing my thing. And you're like both brothers to me. So, what's up, you know? But for them, no, they they're more concerned about their perceived injustice. That's really true. It's the saddest thing I've ever seen saddest thing I've seen in my life. Probably if you said what's the saddest thing you've you've ever seen, it's like watching two brothers that love each other just like go at each other's throat over money. It's just the saddest saddest thing you could see in your life. And I promise you, both those guys have I'd say they probably already lost God knows what just by not having me in their lives. And that's going to continue. And that's that that number's going to rack up. But at least they don't have to lose anything. But then, of course, they did in court fees. So, actually they already both lost their million in court fees. So, actually just for the feeling of being right, they lost what they lost. So, think about that. That's human nature. It's the power of investment. It's that it's that we don't want to lose um what we've invested into, okay? And so, understanding that, basically because people are so averse to losing investment, then what you want to do is you want to put out just enough to get them to invest a little bit of attention. And then what you do is you get them to invest that attention. Then you put a little bit more and get them to invest attention. Then you put a little bit more, and then you get them to invest attention. Then you put a little bit more, then you get them to invest attention. And that's how you do it. So, let me give an example. Say that you're going to walk up and say hi to somebody. Now, by hi, that's the worst opener ever. So, say that you're going to walk up and introduce yourself to somebody. So, maybe you maybe what you do is you go up and you do an imitation, okay? Now, why is an imitation one of the best things that you could do as a way to introduce yourself? It's emotional. Anything about a person only has to be a three out of 10 and they still care. Okay? If it's about them. So, if it's about you, it could be three out of 10 interesting. It could even be one out of 10 interesting and it becomes 10 out of 10 interesting. In other words, for me to make you laugh, I have to get to at least a seven. Does that make sense? I got to get to a seven to make you laugh. But if it's about you, okay? If it's about you personally, Yeah. Okay. That was three out of 10 funny, but because it's about him, I can get a smile off him. You see this? See that? Three out of 10 funny. Okay? I can get a laugh at three out of 10 funny because it's about them. So, whenever you make it about the person and it's about them specifically, you can get it to uh to hook their interest. So, that's why my favorite way to begin interactions with an imitation. It's probably by far my favorite way, but there's many ways that are amazing, but that's a great one. What's that? No. Does that come out of a comedy writing book? That's all I'm doing. That's all I'm doing. And notice I can get you to laugh. It's three out of 10 funny, but I can get you laugh cuz it's about you. So, in sales copywriting, for example, you do uh you know, a hook about them in particular. Now, what's happened is if you can get someone to read for 30 seconds, they don't want to lose the 30 seconds. So, then you're more likely to get them to be willing to listen to you for maybe a minute. So, at each level of investment, what winds up happening is the person is investing a little bit deeper at each juncture. Is the way that it works. So, in other words, if I was on, say, social media, let's say I was putting out videos, I would want to put out what's called clickbait. Clickbait is something completely idiotic and shocking and it's a diversion. Why? Because the average person who's looking at social media, what is happening? They are in a trance and they want to be in a derp state and then they just want to be entertained. So, then what you do is you put out some kind of shocking headline, they click on it, and then right at the beginning, you say, "I'm going to show you this." Or I'm going to offer you this value, whatever it is, right? Or you put something shocking or funny which hooks. Then if they watch it and they like it, now they're willing to go a little bit deeper. So, in the same way the the general way that we do a funnel is that the very front end is we is we put out videos. The front end of the video is a hooky video. Then it goes deeper. Then people watch more videos. Now they're willing to leave their house to come to a free event. But they wouldn't have been able to do that before cuz if they didn't know you. Then what happens is now they go to a free event. They put in three or four hours and then they like that. Then they're willing to go to an inexpensive event. Then if you overwhelm them with value there, then they're willing to go to a better event. Now, ideally, in the best case possible, you start helping them to make a lot of money. And this is kind of how what's been my bread and butter is, you know, I get a bunch of new recruits and I help them start to get some paper. They start to get some paper and then they say, "Wow, I wouldn't have made that if it wasn't for you." So, now I want to come back. And that's actually what wound up happening to me was over 20 years, there's all these different people that either became famous celebrities or they ran these huge businesses, all of this stuff. A lot of people started banking it and then they come back to me years later and they say, "I want to I want to pay you back for how you helped me." And then I wind up doing business with them. So, that's kind of my little whole stick, right? If you want to know the whole like the real scam, that's the real scam. Basically, I just get a bunch of people rich. You know, I just trick a bunch of people into getting rich and then they want to pay me. That's the scam. Yeah, I just trick a bunch of people into clicking on the video and getting rich and then I scam them into getting rich and then they feel like they want to reciprocate and then they come pay me. So, yes, quite a little quite a little scam. So, basically, that's kind of how I've done it for years and it's um it's one of those things where uh but you've got to get people to have that initial, you know, that initial interest, right? So, understanding the degree of somebody's investment and how deep that it is that you can go with them. How deep that you can go. Um so, that's why for example, a four-day free event is going to have a diminishing crowd each day because they're not willing yet to go to a full four-day thing. But if I can get them to pay a couple bucks, maybe I get them to pay, I don't know, could even be 100 bucks. At $100, you can get you could like say that Okay, say that you had a four-day say you had a four-day event and it's free and say you had 500 people, okay? Let's do some math here. Free event, 500 people. Day one, 500. Day two, three three 80. Day three, 280. And day four, 120. That's that'd be like a free one. At a $99, you probably cut that in half. You know, you'd probably cut that attrition in half. And then at $500, you would cut that attrition down to only 25% and then at $1,000, you're going to cut that attrition down to uh maybe at 95% or 90%. Does that make sense? Yeah. You follow? Yeah. Right? So, so that's kind of how you think of it, right? So, there's things that you can teach at free, there's things that you can teach at 100, there's things you could teach at at a couple hundred, and there's things that you could teach at a thousand, and there's things you could teach at 3,000, right? The event that you're all at here, pretty inexpensive event. So, if I were to take you out in the field right now and I said, "Hey, go talk to them." If you're nervous, you're actually going to say no. You'll say no to me. Many of you in here. If you're nervous. Some of you here have experience with it, so therefore you wouldn't say no, but there's some of you here in here who've never done it. And if I said, "Hey, go say hi." you'd say uh uh I don't I don't really want to, you know, because it's not expensive enough. Now, you triple the price of this event and I say, "Hey, go say hi." you're going to go say hi. You know, you're going to be like you're just going to go do it. Like you're like you're going to be running around there like a chicken with your head cut off. You know, I'll I'll be like having to restrain you. You'll look like a pitbull like trying to get a steak or something like that. So, that's the thing. It's the power of investment. So, once you understand that, like I've had relationships where I was the one spending all the money and I was investing investing investing cuz I really love the person and then later like say we broke up and then later we got back together and then when we got back together, I tried a different approach and I get them to spend all the money on me. And I'm not doing that because I want their money. I actually don't. I think it's weird for me to accept that money, but I would do it to see if I could turn around the dynamic of the relationship. Sure enough, I've seen that work. Once they start spending money on you, they love you. So, it's when they're invested. Why? Because if they spend money on you, they're going to focus on your positive qualities. If they're not spending money on you, they're going to tend to focus on your negative qualities. So, this just this understanding that. Another thing that you also have to understand is that if for any reason you can't walk away, you actually trigger what's called an RAS flip. And this is huge and I'd really urge you to understand this. So, the inab Okay, repeat this after me. The inability to walk away The inability to walk away triggers an RAS flip. Triggers an RAS flip. So, what that is is that human beings, we have a reticular activation system, which is our selective focus. We tend to focus on some things and we block out other things. We tend to focus either on value or a threat. So, what winds up happening is that if we if we have it to where the person who we're dating or working with knows that we have other options, they will tend to focus on the positive in us and they will tend to be afraid to walk away because they know that you can immediately go to somebody else. But as soon as they know that you have no other options or that you rely on them either for income or for intimacy or whatever, it doesn't matter if it's men or women, it could be, you know, another man who you're working with, it could be a woman who you're dating or vice versa, whatever, and the behavior will be very very similar, actually. Very very very similar. So, I could be say dating somebody and initially it's this really good vibe and it's like you're it's like you're in love and everything's so positive, but then let's say that you were actually dating a bunch of other people, they're going to treat you amazing. But then as you stop dating those other people and you go exclusive and then maybe you haven't gone out and socialized in a year and a half or two years, so now you've lost your you've lost all the other people you're dating, you've lost all your female friends who you could have dated, you've lost your social skills because let's be honest, learning how to like initiate conversations, that's a skill. Let's be real, right? Like that's a skill that just like the gym, you lose. You know how it is. You come out of a relationship, you can barely remember how to say hi to somebody anymore. It's like, how do I do this again? This is so I never thought I'd have to do this again and you have to again. And so now you've lost you've lost your social skills, you've lost the other people you're dating, you've lost your female friends and that same person who treated you like this royalty now all of a sudden treats you really really bad and all they can do is focus on the negative. But it's the same thing when you're working with people. I've had it where uh people who I'm working with, they will become um what'll happen is we'll all be Here'll be an example. I'm running a business and the business has an infrastructure. Now, what I'm doing is I'm making my own videos and I'm putting out my own products and I'm doing my own live events and I'm having fun doing that and so they don't have any fame and they don't have any following and they don't have a you know, any career in this. So, when I first meet that person, they're like really excited, really keen, like super positive, always wants to go out, always wants to build the skills, always really win-win, always synergistic, it's really cool. Later, I actually start enjoying seeing what they're cultivating and I say, "You know, instead of me working on my stuff and I could be doing very well with that, I'm going to work on your stuff." And then I start working on their stuff more and more and what'll happen is the more that I work on their stuff, they're really appreciative. They're like, "Wow, this is amazing. Thank you. Oh, I just did my first a million dollar launch. I just did this. I just did that." And I start to get excited cuz I like seeing other people win and I enjoy playing a a maternal role. I'm a bit of a mom. I'm kind of a bit more of a mom than a dad in many ways. Like I just I like to see people who I help really blossom. It's more fun for me to play the Dr. Dre role than to be Eminem or Snoop. Like I actually enjoy cultivating other people's brands. That's why I cultivated so many brands. Many of the brands that you follow, I'm the person behind the scenes cultivating that. So, it's not just in my old community. I'm doing that privately behind the scenes. I really enjoy seeing other people blossom and being a supportive role. So, what'll happen is they start to blossom, but it's always right at that point where where as soon as they're able to see that the infrastructure that's being supported is now relying on their income, as soon as they see that, here's what you'll see. Um hey, I want more money. And I go, "Okay." And then a month later, "Hey, I want an even bigger percentage." I go, "Okay." "Hey, I want even bigger percentage." I say, "Hey, we we can't float the infrastructure if we do that." "I don't care Well, and then this is always the same response. It's happened many times. Well, you're not going to have any infrastructure if I leave, are you? So, you better give me more money." And they also know that I'm not going to talk crap so and you know, cuz they know cuz I just don't do that. So, then there's no downside there. So, it's not a really a boundary and then basically that that pattern happened again and again. And so by the end of it, you'd see it to where it would literally be 100% to zero. But here was the weird part. You want to know the best part? Even when I'd get to 100% to zero, which I just do cuz I just didn't want to disappoint our community. So, I just kind of left it like that. They would still call me and yell at me. I just became like a whipping boy. Just call and just yell at me for no reason. This would literally go on. So, when I saw that pattern, I realized, "Wait a minute. This is because what I was doing, my mistake was I was allowing my infrastructure on the back end to be reliant on certain people. I allowed it to get to that point. Now, I don't think in those ways. I'm not the kind of person where I'm thinking like, "Oh, I'm having fun with somebody. I have to protect from future bad behavior." I don't think in those manners. I bet you that many of you don't either. But you have to understand, I love all human beings. I don't I love all the people that I've worked with. I'm not mad at any of them, even the people I've just sort of alluded to. I'm not mad at them. Any of them. But there is a certain reality of human nature that is very very predictable and it's extremely obvious and you're going to see it coming. It's this. No matter how much you love somebody or care for them, if you get to the point where you have no other options and your reliance on them, they will probably have an RAS flip. That is human nature. The only people that aren't going to have that are people who are very spiritual, people who are very connected to their higher power, people with incredibly high levels of integrity so that even when they feel themselves having an RAS flip, they're like, "No, I'm not going to do that. That's against my values." That's the only kind of person I can do that. And that's very very rare and you can't count on that. And the thing is, if you meet someone when it's new and they can get more from you than you can get from them initially, then you have to understand that they're going to appear like that really high-level person. That's not who they are. You don't know who somebody is until they have sucked all the value from you. Then you know who they are. That's it, okay? So, as long as they want or need your um your validation Here's here's the basis of the three things. It's either they want your validation, just per they just personally want it. They want to have certain life experiences that involve you. There's a certain experience they want to have that you would be an integral part of that. Or some kind of value. Could be connections, could be financial, but some kind of like actual value. Until they've gotten the experiences they want, the validation they want, and the value they want, you don't know who they are. At all. And in fact, at the end of that train, they may treat you worse than they even treat the average person because the average person, at least they have a social relationship with. So, they might even treat you worse than the people they that they have social relationships with. And you're going to see this. So, how do you get around that? Make sure that you are never overly reliant on one particular situation. You want to have it to where people are invested in you, not because you need it. Okay? It's not cuz you need the investment. It's because you can actually do more together when they're invested. You can all the cool stuff that you want to do with them, you can't do whether or not invested. All the cool stuff that you want to do with that person, you can't do if you don't have other options and if you're relying on them. All that cool stuff, you can't do it. So like it's not about you being like hahaha, I always have options. hahaha, I always withdraw validation. It's not about that. It's that it's not it's not that you need that. It's that all that fun cool stuff that you could go do, the only way that you don't need to to make sure that you have those options available is if again, you're with somebody who is very spiritually elevated. There's some people in the world, some, very rare, where if you invest in them, they see what you did, they appreciate it, and they invest right back. I believe I'm one of those people. When somebody's so nice to me, I will try to 10x down on them. That's how I am. That's why I couldn't project into that kind of reality. I couldn't see that because I don't think like that. So it would always catch me by surprise because I couldn't project into that reality. It's like somebody who's an empath, they tend to get abused by narcissists and sociopaths because it's not real to them that somebody else is thinking like that. If you don't realize that sociopath exists or that narcissist exists, when it when you get around somebody like that, it's not real to you. You keep thinking they've got a soul in there. In fact, you want to believe that everybody has a chance to have a soul and a connection to God and the chance to evolve. Sociopathy is a very difficult thing to absorb for people that are spiritual because when you realize that that person basically has no soul and is basically condemned to hell, it's difficult spiritually cuz you're thinking, well, everybody has a chance to go to heaven. Everybody has a soul. Everybody's a child of God. Why would God forsake that person and make it to where they're not even in control? There's just nothing there. But understand, for a lot of sociopaths or people with narcissism, they'll tell you like, lights look on, there's no one home. You ever seen American Psycho? There's nobody there. There's nobody actually there. There's no one there. So in other words, um it's like a shark. Um a shark is just a shark. It's it's it's basically being run by the physical intelligence. The spiritual connection, the spiritual intelligence has been snuffed out. The light in the eyes has been snuffed out and they're literally just replicating the behavior of an empath. That's why people that are that are uh sociopathic are often very charismatic because while you might be empathetic and then you learn about things like charisma or social skills here or elsewhere, wherever, on your own your own experience, um you've got to actually fight through confidence issues to get there. You know, you you've got to fight through your own inner battle, your own inner struggle, building your confidence, building your foundation. A psychopath or narcissist or sociopath, they don't have to do that. They're numb. They A sociopath so rarely, pretty pretty much never, will become an empath because they view empathy as a disease. They view empathy as a disease because why? All those things that you deal with of you having self-doubt and caring about other people, that's a lot of heavy stuff, right? So a psychopath looks at it like, why would I want to have that? Uh to a sociopath, you want to know how they view it? They view it that it's like a chess game and there's x amount of moves on the table that they have. They might have infinite number of moves, whereas an empath only has like 20 moves. That's how they see it. Because an empath is confined by morality. An empath is confined by um integrity, win-win. To them, there's no limit. However, what generally happens with psychopaths and narcissists is they lead to their own downfall. They actually lack discernment. They're actually some of the most vulnerable people in the world and for many of them, the only way they can feel anything is either by winning because then because they can't feel their emotions, so then they can only feel that they're winning if they beat somebody else. Um or they feel emotions by uh rage cuz they're because I think it's that rage I I may be wrong on this one, but I think what it was is that rage is hormonal, so they can still feel that cuz part of their brain's damaged, but it was something like that. And the other one is uh they can feel alcohol. So they often get hooked on alcohol cuz they can actually feel something from that. It's actually the saddest thing in the world when somebody uh has that. But to them, they think they're liberated, they think they're winning. They would even hear this AND BE LIKE, HAHAHA, WHAT a [ __ ] Like they would they would literally uh view it like that. And they often take great pride and pleasure in attacking people that are very good cuz that's the only way they can relate to them. So they see that energy that somebody that's very good has and because they they lack it, they feel drawn to it. It's like a moth to a It's like they obsess over it and they want to kind of stalk it or or like be around it and then maybe ideally even snuff it out because they want they kind of want to vandalize God's architecture. They want to vandalize that. They want to snuff it out or they want to take that person and they want to antagonize them into being evil themselves so that they can be pulled down to their level and pull them into hell with them. So that's a big thing is that you don't want to ever react. Yep. read uh Political Ponerology by Andrew M. Lobaczewski? No. He talks about the concept of what happens when you you think of petty psychopaths, Mhm. which will do things like they'll they'll go shoot up a store and then you know, they have no empathy there. But the actual smart ones will rise to power at times. And you know, you you you look at some things that certain political leaders do and you go, how in that How is this possible? Yep. How can that be possible? The answer is they're just psychopaths. Yeah, psychopaths or uh low empathy individuals that are patsies that get put in place uh because they know that they're patsies and they have low integrity. So yeah, and and some of them um that you see are just so low functioning and the kind of people that should never be leaders and they get put in that position. Yep. Uh you'd said one, they want your validation. Two, they want some kind of experience. Yeah, it could be like like maybe they just want to be like like maybe they maybe they want like in my case, they probably want, you know, to be around like high-level coaching and crowds. They probably want to have uh you know, just like maybe they're just curious to meet me and like see what that would be like or maybe they maybe they want to make millions of dollars in coaching. And you said until they get these, You don't know who they are. And so how does that relate to you investing and maybe even marriage or something? Okay, so here's what it So here's what it So here's what it is. It is that you want to view it like you don't really know who somebody is for at least at least until you've been around them long enough. So basically what you want to do, here's how I do it now. Okay, so when I was younger, what I did was I just gave and gave and gave and gave and gave and gave and gave. That's why anybody who I was around became very successful. And through their own efforts as well, it was our combined efforts. But it was like just give give give. Probably never seen anything like it. Then what you do is realize that that's flawed and it's going to cause problems. So then what you do, and here here's how I do it now. So whatever I'm whenever I'm involved with somebody now, I say to myself, if they completely turn sideways, how how could I engage with that person where it's enough of a win for me that if they were to turn sideways, I would be happy with the time that we spent together. Okay? I would I would look upon that time that we spent together as a win. And then what I do is I find a healthy win-win where they're winning and I'm winning and I keep it at a win-win. What I used to do was I did it as a win-lose where I What I would do is I would hamper my career, I would hold back my career, not build my brand, not do things that I want to do to help other people build their thing um and then I would help them to get that off the ground, but then once they have that off the ground, sayonara. And then I would feel bad about it. And in their mind, they're like, well, you know, you got money off of it, too. And I'm thinking like, yeah, about 5% what I would have done doing my own thing, but they think that I should be happy with that. They they think I took from them because, you know, if I could have made say, you know, our business, I don't know. Let's say that I Let's say that I would have made an extra 5 million in revenue based on my own sales in that time and then with them I made an extra 1 million, they view it like they gave me 500 grand in their mind. Like I took 500 grand from them. Whereas in my mind, I'm like, no, I lost that opportunity cost. But I don't talk to them like that cuz that's not how I talk to people. I would never communicate with somebody like that. So I hold that close to the vest. Even though I feel it, I don't say it, but so probably doesn't occur to them either. Plus, every human being thinks that they're right and everybody else is wrong. So that's just human nature. So it just doesn't come to light. So that was the old way that I used to do it was I'd be left high and dry. What I do now instead was you know, the way that I do it now cuz people used to always say to me like, you have an empire, Owen. I was like, I kind of have a lot of liabilities. I just enjoy building this cuz I love it. I love seeing other people winning. I like having a lot of coaches. I like having a big organization. So I like that part. But as far as the the empire, I mean, I could I mean, like most of business owners, I could I mean, just do the math on this room right now. Like most of you in this room probably think this is a highly profitable event. The main profit off this event will just be the videos. Do you realize that? Yeah. Yeah, and that's even with sales. Even with me doing sales, I do that to keep your guys costs down, but you probably won't even occur to that. You know what I'm saying? So it's literally like one of the It's one of those things where like most of you probably never even did the math on this. You probably never did the math on what does it cost to rent this room? What is What are everybody's hours cost here? What does it cost to fly everybody here? What do accommodations cost? What is opportunity cost of other things that we could have been doing? There's not a lot of companies like doing live events like this all the time, right? There's a reason for that. But I love it. I love public speaking. I love making videos. I you know, why do you think I've been here yesterday slamming down on the gas? Like today I'm I'm pretty beat up. You probably tell I'm pretty beat today. But you know, why do you think I slammed on the gas that hard? My pay was being allowed to do some dope ass videos and to be able to do some public speaking. That was like my pay. You probably don't you That never occurs to most people. The average person not running a business thinks that people running businesses just make profit hand over fist. There's expenses in businesses, but most people never think about that. They're like, what's those expenses? Like just like throw up a website. Like that's literally what they think. That's That's what everybody will say. So, then, from there, what I trained myself to do, I trained myself to see it differently to where if I'm going to engage with somebody, if for whatever reason they never talk to me again, they never return the phone call, they they, you know, they talk crap on me, never talk to me again, at least I had a positive net experience, and then I could walk away from it. But, here's the funny thing, because I monitor that, I don't get over invested, and then people don't sense that I'm over invested, and then now I haven't had a single person do that to me in several years. You see the difference? Thank you, man. Yeah, and here's the other thing, too. Then, what you do is you almost want to view it like a lily pad that you can kind of like bounce off of, but you don't necessarily have to plant roots with. So, in other words, I don't mind if some people are not long-term. I don't care. But, now, the way that I have it is if somebody wants to be deeply involved with me, they have to prove it to me. It's not me doing it for them. I'm not going to do all that investment up front because what I found was, if I'm not careful, my good intentions of just who I am as a person, just being a good-intended person, that comes across wrong. You ever heard the expression, "No good deed will go unpunished"? Right? It's like, I that will be I'm investing because I just enjoy it. I I just love creating things. I like seeing people win. But, other people will interpret that like I need something from them or I want something from them or that they can bully me around. So, this was me coming out of codependence when I was younger. There's a word for this called codependent. So, I grew up as a codependent. And codependence can also be confused with spirituality because spirituality is about giving. So, then you read something like the Bible talking about giving or Eckhart Tolle talking about giving, and then you think that's spiritual, but you don't realize that could also be codependent. So, part of being spiritual is that you also have to win, too. So, I have boundaries now. And anybody tries to mess with my boundaries, they can't get past it. Like, literally, I'll be nice, but if someone goes past like I know exactly where my boundary is where I'm like, "This is no longer good for me either, and I'm not going to go there." And I'm not And but but here's the best part, if you're an empathetic person who wants other people to win, that's how you help them win. It didn't help people win when I just loaded them up with with all this stuff. It didn't help them. By the end of it, they would always have an RAS flip. So, it didn't actually work. I'm the kind of person where somebody invests in me, I like that. I'm like, "Oh, someone's investing in me, I want to reciprocate times 10." But, that's not the majority of people. They're not thinking in that manner. So, you can't just put you If you think like that, you can't put that on them. So, here's the basic pattern. Look, people who are generally poor and to be honest, kind of losers, and I'm not hating on them, I'm just being honest, like where they sit in life, they generally don't want to give anything, right? They're like, "No, I'm not going to give. I just want to take." Those people are known as creeps. Then, you have people who just want to give give give give give. That's called codependent. Then, what you have is people who have a healthy win-win balance. That's called healthy healthy and win-win. Later, and this is the final paradigm that I'm not going to cover here, is where you go back to just giving giving and giving and giving and giving, but what you do is you give so much that you stagger CTA points in this complex web on the back end. So, what would be an example of that, which is this is over here This not does not probably a single person here ready for that. An example of that would be like Google. What they do is they give give give give give give give. You just take take take take take take take until you need them, and then what happens then they have all these little kind of subtle CTAs on the back end though, your data, um you know, just you clicking on ads. Mostly mostly your data and you clicking on ads is like huge, um but all sorts of other things, too, right? So, that's where you go back to just give give give give give, but you're not just this codependent just giving giving giving without thinking. What you're doing is you're you're you're creating deep deep deep relationships with those people, and then what you're doing is you're creating webs and webs and webs and webs and webs on the back end. So, like an example, as far as thinking creatively, it would be like this. Say that somebody was at a free event, and they wanted to come to this event, but they're flat broke. Where could I get Where could I get value from that? Let's say somebody's at a free event, where could I get value from that? At a free event if they Say they wanted to come to this event, and they're at a free event, but they couldn't afford to come here. What could I do to get value from them? Testimonial. Could be good. We have a lot of testimonials. What else? Have them help set up the Help set up a room. Maybe you know another one? Say, go get five friends. They call that in sales, they call that turn a dud into a stud. Referral. Yeah, referrals. Referrals. Basically, people that are flat broke, referrals or social proof. Refer Say that word, referrals. Referrals. Social proof. Social proof. Right? So, that So, at the free event, they fill bodies in a room, which creates social proof and authority, and then if they want to come to a paid event, bring five people, they come to a paid event. Anybody want to come to a come to a, you know, one of my trainings, you can't afford it, you want to bring five people? Go Bring it on. I'm totally happy to do that. Just let me know. So, that's the main idea is that you can always find value somewhere. So, that's that's kind of, you know, hitting to like the next level. Next level past that is if if you were God, and then you just gave and gave and gave, but you were like the sun or something, you just gave endlessly, but that's like probably not what we're looking to do. Yeah. CTO CTA points, what does that mean? Uh CTA is a call to action. Oh, yeah. I mean, if you if you said right now I want to do a training, you could go and grab five friends that could afford it. Of course, you know, right? Who wouldn't take that? Because you're doing That's like That's hard work. Like, lead generation is real work. Like, that's That's actually a lot of work, generating leads. I mean, there's a reason why if you look at our business, like so many people make commentary on our videos, you know the reason why. Like, they'll tell you like, "I just felt compelled to make this video for you, to help you." Like, no, you're trying to get our search volume. Right? We have a lot of search volume. So, that's That's hard to do. It's expensive. It's probably been uh 50 million dollars in work and 20 years of hustle to build the search volume that we have. Well, of course, people are going to make videos about it, try to get ranked in the search engine. Why is that? Cuz leads are expensive. We used to have it at free events where people would rent out rooms above our free events, and they would run around the event saying, "Hey, the next event's upstairs." You know? Yeah, because they do that because it's it's incredibly expensive to assemble groups of people. It's very very very very expensive. There's a reason why Google or Facebook is so rich. They spy on your phone as you're talking, they hear what you're talking about, and they send that lead volume to different businesses. That's incredibly hard thing to do. It's actually highly unethical when they do that, but there's a reason they're doing it. So, yeah, so generating leads is one of the hardest things in any business. You all know that. Most of you in this room probably have some skill that if you had the leads, you could be super rich right now. Am I right? Yes. Most of you in this room, if you just had all these leads, you'd be you'd literally be super rich instantly if you just had the leads. And then if you know how to sell it. So, that's the By the way, as a side note, that's So, lead generation is one skill that is at a very high premium. This kind of little bit rambly here, but some good points, and seems like you're all just kind of following along. Um the other really good skill set is uh is uh CTAs. Um understanding how to do sales. So, if you just like for me, I understand sales very well. So, if you ran like a kitchen company, and you said, "Hey, I have an audience of people that are interested in kitchens, um could you come close to me?" I could say to you, "You're going to give me half the money." And I And you'd say yes. You want to know why? Because an experienced closer is going to probably get about 20 times what you can get. So, because of that, I mean, I'm going to know thing like, you know, I'm going to know how to do like, you know, upsell, downsell, cross-sell, funnel-sell, you know, it's like I'm going to, you know, And And I And I don't have that spiritual blockage of receiving that 99.9% of people have. CTA mean again? Call to action. Yeah, call to action. Cuz you have to understand, like people will see me doing sales videos, and they're like And they'll say like, "I don't like it how you keep saying to buy." Like, I'll keep being like, "Click the link. Click the link." You ever seen me doing that? Yes. Do you want to know what the swing is on a see on a heavy CTA versus no CTA? You're thinking, "Oh, if you put up Like, I don't like that video where you where you say click the link. I just want more like like a friendly video, you know, like how Apple or Coca-Cola does it with like a polar bear." And um And you have to understand, those ads have often billions of dollars in in budget. So, what they do, if you have two billion dollars, then you can afford to put a polar bear with your logo on every street corner in the world. That's how mega-rich, typically venture capital-funded businesses do it. When you're not mega-rich, and you want to go and you want to battle out the big boys, you learn CTAs. You learn lead generation, niche-based lead generation, and you learn CTAs is how you do it. Okay, so here's what it means. Quick question? Yeah. Um so, how many posts would you do on your social medias or on YouTube, and then do a CTA cuz you're probably going to do CTAs for all of them. I'll give you all even more info if you want to know. I'll go You want me to go deeper? I can. I'm I'm a little bit rambling. I'm a little bit off of uh the course curriculum here, but I'm happy to do it if you want. All right. I'm going to show you guys like the deal. You ready to learn like the deal? All right, here's how it works. Okay. So, couple pointers. Let me first wrap up the other point. Spiritually, most of you can't receive. That's most of you. There's either spiritual blocks on giving or spiritual blocks on receiving. So, some people, if you say, "Hey, go make a free video," they can't do it. They just physically can't do it. They need to get paid right now. You ever seen that book, Gary Vaynerchuk, Jab Jab Right Hook? That's because spiritually, a lot of those money-grubbing corporations couldn't psychologically process Gary V's way of doing social media, which is just to add value. They couldn't handle it, right? They're like, you know, some like old, you know, corporate CEO, you know, used to doing things off television. They love TV. Corporations love TV because you can force people to watch the ads. Cuz there's only three channels back in the day. NBC, CBS, and NBC, ABC, and me NBC, CBS, ABC, and a bit of Fox, right? So, there's like three to four channels back in the day. And so, you're watching your your favorite sitcom, you're there for half an hour, and they can just buy the airtime with venture capital, and then they can make you watch it. That was called interruption advertising. Interruption advertising. And so, interruption advertising is where you could just interrupt people. Now, that worked when there's like three or four channels, and you didn't have competitors, because you couldn't have as many niche-based competitors back then. At most, they could do it through uh mail, they could do mailing, or they could do um like Avon-type stuff, or Amway-type stuff, where you create these multi-level marketings or things like that. That's kind of how you did it back in the day. So, a lot of the old-school self-help companies, they did a lot of this you know, companies like Landmark maybe. Um yeah, they would do it where you would come in the course, and then they would get you to enroll your friends. And they would and they really press you to enroll your friends. Well, you want to know why that is? Cuz if you didn't enroll your friends, their business is literally over within a month. Think about that. If for 1 month, they don't get everyone to enroll their friends, there's no internet back then. They can't afford TV ads. The whole company would be dead in the water. That's why it's like, you know, you're like you go to some of the Landmark you're like, "Wow, they really really getting you to enroll, right? I should probably do that." But they they're like they're really getting you to enroll. Why? Cuz that's the only thing they can do. But when you have social media now, all of a sudden, interruption marketing doesn't work very well. So, I would have friends in my entrepreneurs groups that work with companies like Guthy-Renker. You know what Guthy-Renker is? They created Proactiv skin care. They did Get the Edge with Tony Robbins, I think. They did a whole bunch of these like really really famous ads that you probably seen. So, Guthy-Renker, a lot of them, they're getting frustrated because that people aren't watching their long infomercials anymore. They're losing money. They they dominated the world for so long. So, they I'm getting knowing Guthy-Renker, they're so adaptive, they probably figured out the internet by now, but this is when the internet was just coming out. And so, people from Guthy-Renker would come to me, and they would ask me for advice. Now, I'm like this dorky little self-help coach, but they're asking me for advice cuz they're like, "I love how you just, you know, get out there, and you make your videos, and like, you know, but like how much money do you make per video?" I'm like, "I don't, you know, I literally 95% of the videos I put out the whole year is building up maybe to one launch." Think about that, right? So, spiritually, the companies hate it because they're spiritually takers. So, they hate having to just make video video video video video. Free event free event free event free event. Look at all the free stuff that we put out. Free videos. Our budget on free videos is several million a year. And and making free videos takes up most of my year. And we don't have Google ads. So, we don't get paid on that. So, we literally do a product launch maybe like I might do a major product launch maybe once a year. And what's sad to me, by the way, is sometimes I'll do that launch, and sometimes people even dislike that video, and I'm thinking, "Do you not have enough meta-level awareness to realize that if this launch doesn't work, I go away?" They don't they never think that. Like, if this doesn't work, the free videos are gone, and I go get a job. And they're thinking like like, you know, they're like, "This video's Oh, thank you so much, man. This video's interrupting me." But you know that person is probably flat broke. So, ironically, see, here's the thing. When you give and give and give and give, about 10% of the people who you attract are going to be hardcore takers. Hardcore hardcore takers. Now, when you're like what I was as a codependent, almost everybody will be around you will be takers. But what happens you give give give give give, about 10% are takers. That's that 10% of people that you see on the sales video that are like, "I don't like this. I JUST WANT to take more free stuff." So, so they're hardcore that spiritually they're takers, and they're attracted to you cuz you're a giver. It's like a moth to a to a flame. They're attracted to that. But they're very unhealthy. They're they're they're almost spiritually dying, okay? So, big corporations also like TV because they can be faceless. They hate the internet. So, a lot of the people who I work with are people that run big companies that are realizing that they have to learn how to talk to their audience. And up until now, for the last 20 years, they could just hide behind a TV commercial. They never had to learn to be human. And because they've become borderline sociopathic from running a business, and now all of a sudden people want to meet the owner of that company, they are so messed up. They are so messed up. So, that's where you'd see things like Netflix when they had their little issue maybe 10 or 12 years ago, and um the owner has to suddenly make a video, and he tried to make that thing called Quickster. Anybody remember that? Yeah, they got mad because he took the DVDs away from as a separate service from streaming. And then he tries to make this video where he like levels with everybody, and then he makes this other DVD service called Quickster, and it blew up in his face. He probably like killed like 20% of his stock value by making one dumb video. So, a lot of people who I work with, the people who are are some of my high-end clients, they run big companies, and they want me to help them to be the face of their company, and help them become human. So, that's you know, one of the things that I do that's quite common. I do it behind the scenes, and I do it privately. I don't talk about it cuz if I talk about it, then I can I can say vaguely, or I'll say names of people who gave me the green light, but other than that, I keep it private, cuz then I wouldn't have clients anymore. So, going from that standpoint, um that's this whole thing they struggle with giving. Now, most of you in this room, um you a lot of you can also struggle with taking, or or a better or sorry, taking's the wrong word for it. The the proper word spiritually is receiving. Have you ever maybe dated somebody who all they want is like designer shoes or things like that? Like that's all they want? That's cuz that person's a taker. Then, have you ever dated somebody who like you could never um do anything in bed to please them, but they only want to please you? You ever had that? Oh, I've definitely had that. Yeah, so, what it is is that is that there's people who can't receive. Like they're they're not able to even let you give them pleasure. They they can't do it. Do any of you here in this room ever feel like you struggle to receive a compliment? Like I'm like, "Hey, you're really cool." And you're and you're like, "Yeah, yeah." Like that. I had the same problem. I remember a buddy of mine, when I started to realize my codependence a few years back, a buddy of mine gave me a really big compliment, and immediately he said, "Hey, oh, that was really cool." And my answer was um "Oh, hey, yeah, you know, I'm I'm working on this and this, and you know, next time you come over, I'll I'll I'll give you some of this." And I caught myself, and and he looked at me and said, "Owen." I just want to say thanks. That's all I'm saying. And I was like, "Yeah." "Yeah." And I realized that I struggle to receive a compliment. So, I just I want to be in give mode all the time. But what is that? Codependence is where as a kid, you you didn't get love from your parents properly, and even if they tried their best. All parents try their best. I don't think any parent wishes to do that. They really tried their best. But for whatever reason, maybe it didn't land with you, whatever the case. So, you had to train yourself to be this perfect person in order to survive. By the way, narcissists also, which is the flip side of codependence, you can read a book called Human Magnet Syndrome by Ross Rosenberg, which is very powerful, or watch Ross Rosenberg's uh YouTube channel, which is 10 out of 10. Saved my freaking life. Um basically what it yeah, Ross Rosenberg. The book is Human Magnet Syndrome. Actually even like the YouTube channel even better, and he probably has the courses are probably amazing. So, I never did the course, but it'd probably be really good. So, what he what he explained was narcissists also probably didn't get love when they were kids, but then what they learned was to close off the loop of needing love. So, they just give themselves approval. That's why they got a grandiose self-image, but it also leaves them very vulnerable cuz they reframe everything in their favor, and it makes them toxic. So, codependent and narcissist tend to be like a magnet because the give give give person attracts the take take take person. And that's what I was doing when I was younger, was I was always give give give, and then I attracted people who were takers. Now, when you do free videos, about 10% of people who you attract will be these hardcore takers, and that's just part of the demographic, and those are the kind of people that even when you go to do a product, they're angry, they only want the free stuff. And basically, they're ironically, they're also limiting themselves. Why? Because when you're a pure taker, is anyone going to really do business with you? They call that penny wise, dollar poor. They're penny wise, dollar poor. They they mess themselves up. It's super sad, actually. So, then going from that standpoint, um spiritually, there's many of you in this room who also don't know how to receive at all. You don't know how to receive at all. So, for me, I didn't know how to receive. So, I had to train myself that. So, part of my sales training was me understanding how to receive. I had to understand that. So, back in the day, as an example, if I would do a product launch, or if I would do a sale from the front of the room, say I'd be doing a sale from the front of the room, just that little look of like two or three people in the room that look sad that they couldn't maybe afford to do the program, it was so hard for me to accept that that I would not want to do the sale. That's literally how bad it was. And there's another thing, too. If I had there's a thing called lead customers, okay? A lead customer is somebody who's a pure taker. And they will refund and again, anybody want to get a refund, go for it. Like, I'm not calling you that, but I'm just saying like there is something in business called a lead customer, where everything you do, they're going to complain. They're only going to they're they're going to only disrupt. They're only going to disrupt things. They're only going to complain, and they're going to complain and after the they're the same people that after they refund you, are then going to go on to Yelp and write a negative review when they took an entire weekend of your time. You know, I remember being like 23, and this and this one student, he said, "Hey, I want an extra day of boot camp. I want I'm not satisfied." I said, "Okay." I gave it to him. He said, "Hey, I want another day of boot camp." I said, "Okay." I gave it to him. He said, "I want another day of boot camp." I said, "Okay." I gave it to him. I gave him like seven or eight days of boot camp every day. Then at the end of it, he still refunded it, but then after he burned a week of my life, then he went and wrote every bad review he could find. That's called a lead customer, right? It's like it's it's not it's not like I've had people that, you know, they'll take my my courses, and then they demand a job. I say no because I can tell they're nuts. Then okay, they're visibly nuts. Then, they go onto YouTube and make video after video after video about how I'm like this big jerk. And then and and doing it like a decade later while they then take the exact course that they learned from me and replicate it and copy it, use my terminology, use my the names of like the names of my programs, the jargon in my programs. They'll literally be like, "Owen doesn't teach you how to assume your value and see the poll like me." And I'm like, that's the jargon that I popularized. Now, come to my boot camp. I'm like, that's the jargon I popularized. It's like but literally that's a lead customer, right? Someone who's so nuts that all they do is just cause trouble with everybody. They have beef with everybody. They're mad at everybody. They're totally whacked out of their skull. And then and they believe it. Like they're in that world. You could Some people might call that satanic possession. They're just in that world. It's like they're in this just dark world. They're disconnected from any kind of present energy. You'll also notice a big thing with people like that, they hate anything process oriented. Anything process oriented. They hate it. Anytime that you talk about being positive or process orientation or elevating your state, they hate that stuff because they're in that mode. Okay, that's the mode that they're in. So, you're going to see people like this. And when I'm younger, if I saw somebody in that mode, I would do anything to help them. I'm like, I would sit there with them for weeks or months just like, "How do I help you?" You can't. You've got to allow them to figure it out for themselves. They've got to make their own mistakes. They've got to have their own awakening. They've got to go through their life. It just is what it is. It's called a lead customer. So, what happens is that for a lot of people, they struggle they struggle with being a taker. Other people struggle with not knowing how to receive. So, I had that. So, for example, if I would I remember um I remember I got Jeff to do a product launch. And you know, Jeff is like at that time he was making maybe 30K a year. He'd been working for a couple years for 30K a year. And he's finally going to have his first big product. And a bunch of people hit me up and they're like, "Don't turn Jeff into someone like you that has like products. I like him the way he is." And I'm thinking like, "As a failure? Like as somebody who's who is broke? Like somebody who won't be able to afford to keep teaching? That's what you like?" But people in that world are crabs in a bucket and they'll keep pulling each other down. So, you have to get to a point where you don't care. You've got to understand how little I care about internet trolling, about hardcore takers, about lead customers, about people who don't want to give me approval. I don't care at all. It means nothing to me. I've healed that. That is And and many of them think that I'm still affected by that and they'll try that. And they'll And people like that, they know what your buttons are. Like they know what would hurt you most and they'll poke you with that. But again, you can heal that. And see, here's another thing to understand, people like that are in many ways your best friends in the world. You want to know why? Cuz they're going to feel out exactly where that tender spot is on you and they're going to poke at it until you can heal it. They're going to poke at it until you can heal. Let me say another thing. Every single thing that I always didn't want to have happen in my whole career has now happened. All the things that was You ever heard the expression fear to period? You ever heard that? Fear to period. Say that word, fear to period. All the things that I just super didn't want to have happen. Like take that instant I told you before about where I have like people I'm working with going at each other's throats. Do you understand how embarrassing that was for me? You know what I'm saying? Like how that looks to my organization, how embarrassing that looks. And it it's like I would just do anything to solve it. I'm like, "What do I have to do? Do you just want Like that missing what you perceive is that missing money? Do you want me to give that to you? Do you want me to just give THAT TO YOU?" NO, CUZ THEY JUST WANT TO KEEP FIGHTING. RIGHT? LIKE, "WHAT DO YOU need to JUST STOP THIS?" NO. RIGHT? IT DOESN'T MATTER WHAT IT IS. THEY HAVE their own perspective and it would sound real when you'd hear it. But you know, I'll leave it at that. So, going from that standpoint, these are the kind of things that terrified me. They terrified me. But almost every single nightmare thing about losing approval or anything that could have ever happened in my career has happened now. It's just anything you could think of that's like embarrassing, that would hurt your ego, that would push on your wounds, that would push on your shortcomings. That's happened now. And what you realize is you have to heal that. Not knowing how to receive is a light level mental illness. Not knowing how to give is a light level mental illness. People who can't give, that's I don't know if I'd call it mental illness. Maybe I'd call it neurosis. I don't know what I'd call it. It's a spiritual condition. Some people spiritually cannot give. Some people spiritually cannot receive. So, that was a big thing for me. Now, I'm very very tuned into that. If I go to a free event, I will go do three or four hours of presentation and then I'll make an offer. Then I'll go to That offer will last 10 minutes, but I'll make an offer. Then I'll go do another three or four hours of presentation. Then I'll make an offer. Give, receive. Give, receive. Give, receive. Same thing, you go to a bar club. Any ever Any you ever do or you go to a bar club and you know, you talk to someone and talk and talk and talk and then you know they really like you and you want to say, "Hey, let's go eat." or you know, "Let's go to an after party." but you don't want to do it cuz you don't want to break rapport. You care too much that maybe you ruin the vibe. That's a mental condition. That's you saying, "I'm going to give and give and give and light up everybody else's night, but I'm not going to go enjoy my night." In the same way, however, there's people that are creepy that don't want to give value. All they want to do is just sit there and they want to just try to take. And that's called a creep. A healthy person is able to give and receive. But you remember I said like Google, there's that higher level paradigm where you give a ton on the front end and have all these CTAs on the back end that are like webs? That's the higher higher level because maybe you say, "You know what? I'm going to do a party." You give give give at some huge party. Everybody comes, but you make all these business connections, you make all these friends, and you wind up dating like 30 different people. You gave a ton away, but you get a lot back, too. However, um you can also do parties where you got used. Right? But a party where you did it properly, there's all of these You'd almost call them intangibles. It's like these intangibles. Like let me give a challenge to you. By me doing free videos online, yes, I also am able to do a product launch once or twice a year. But what is it also um Oh, and by the way, take a pause. Really let that sink in that my whole business is me investing into making free stuff with the hopes that once or twice a year people will reciprocate. Think about that. Think about that. Do you know what that's like? Let that land. Every employee that I have, every member of my team, my whole hopes and aspirations when I go do that launch is tied up in that. If that doesn't pop, what happens? I go away. I go away. And I've done this and lived like this for 20 years because I've never had a failed launch. Every launch I've done has smashed it. Every single one has exceeded expectations. I've never not hit the mark. I always exceed the mark every time. Okay? But imagine living like that. I don't have any guarantees. You know, I don't have any guarantees. It's It's a It's a powerful way to live. Um quick question, but I want to keep going. Yeah, just as side, what do you think are your love languages? Well, let me keep let me keep going. Okay. And And let me give an example, too. What I would have done in the past was I would have answered that, but it because it's tangentially related. But what I what I've learned now is like if I get a question and we're on a stream for the whole group, I actually will say I'll I'll chat you later in the night. I've learned that. But that actually was a thing for me. I couldn't Even just a slightly disappointed face, I'd be like, "Huh? Huh? Huh? Huh?" And I'd just like keep going on it. But I'll ask you later. I'll promise you. So, yeah, but I had a real problem with that. So, uh to continue then, doing those free videos though, aside from a launch, cuz people think I make money from ads. I don't I'm not monetized. I love that you think that. Huh. You probably don't realize how serious the whole situation is if you think I'm monetized. But anyway, so um what are some other benefits that I would get from doing videos though? What are some side benefits from giving? Legacy. The pride and self-esteem of legacy. Yep, what else? Personal fulfillment. Personal fulfillment. Yeah. Now now let's be But let's not even just do like the gooies like fulfilling. Like let's not even like do that even though it's true. Like personal fulfillment that leads to like what selfish thing that I would receive? Validation. But even then I don't need it at this point. But But what would be another one? You get better ideas. Okay, well, one of it would be accessing deeper and deeper flow states. Um another of it could be um a lot of celebrities who watch my stuff privately and will hit me up and give me business contacts who wouldn't have done that if I wouldn't have done free videos. Another one could be that I was able to get better and better at public speaking and developing ideas while doing free videos, which then allows me to do a bigger product launch. So, there's there's there's other unknown variables. Like there's experience that I've had by meeting celebrities. But um a lot of people that are incredible to date have reached out to me and that's been amazing. There's been a lot of incredible experiences that are side experiences. Um me walking down the street and whenever I need anything, I just raise my voice a little bit and people recognize me and want to help me out. There's a lot of cool things that have happened. So, there's a lot of intangibles that also happen from giving. But you have to also know how to receive. I have I have a healthy relationship to giving and I have a healthy relationship to receiving. But that took me 40 years. Is really what it took. And what it took was me seeing the living nightmare that not knowing how to receive and being an over giver will give. It took me seeing that. And it was both um it was a combination of One of the really big ones, frankly, was that was that uh public meltdown that I told you about. That that really sucked. Like very embarrassing. And I'd spent years trying to uh resolve that between the different parties. And just realizing like I should have pulled the plug on both of them the the the third time they acted like that I should have said nice knowing you but I doubled down tripled down quadrupled down 10x down 100x down again and again and again and again and again and again doing that and realizing like no it's not going to get better the more they know you can't leave the more they're going to have that behavior. So that's the big thing you've got to have a clear boundary. This is who I am this is where it is this is not where it is. Okay you've got to have that understanding. Then going from there realize that it's a spiritual ailment is the main takeaway. That's the main takeaway. It's a spiritual ailment. People who just want to take are creepy. That's creepy. People who just want to who who can't receive it's also creepy. It's also creepy. There's a balance and the main takeaway is this you can't even engage with people at a high level if they're not invested. This doesn't happen. You're not okay you're not awake at the late hours of the night if you're not invested it doesn't happen. Many of you have been to those four-day free events that I've done by the later days of it the room's empty because people are not invested. Just a couple people are still there. So understand that if you want to actually have fun with people and have healthy relationships people have a healthy balance. So if you're now the only downside is this though unfortunately most takers who hear the speech you know what they think? You know what I realize? I got to take more that's all they can hear that's all they can hear. I'm serious. Like anytime I give a speech about codependence the most narcissistic taker people you've ever seen are completely convinced that they're codependent. So like you're right. I need to take more. You know and they and they can't they can't perceive it. But the idea being a giver is that if you're a taker let's say that you give 80 and the other person gets 20 everybody will want to deal with you. So it's like 80 but you get 20 but you get 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 that person that wants 80 what do they get? 80 and you ever see that movie Lord of the Rings? Remember the Gollum? The precious the precious this is all you'll see it over time you'll realize this is all spiritual. It's a spiritual thing. There's something in your spirit that is either wounded and just over gives and can't receive anything or there's something in your spirit that just needs to take all the time but can't do it. And at its core you want to know what it is? It's that you can't get present. That's what it is. Somebody who's a taker they they struggle with getting present to the moment. They struggle connecting their higher power. So they need to take take take take take take take because they're in scarcity because they're disconnected. Or somebody who can't receive again they think that they get their power from others so it's actually a manipulation. The over giving is an unconscious manipulation. You're giving giving giving giving giving but then people assume that you want something from them. Is what it is. So that was probably my downside of my critique for myself is like why did I need just to make everybody else rich but I couldn't make myself rich. Why did I need to do that when I was younger? What was wrong with me doing that? Why didn't I give them the space to kind of to earn it and to do it on their own? I didn't give them that space. So that happened with that incident the other it was it was someone who I dated at one point and I remember I was dating all these different people and it was going really amazing but there was one person I really liked and I just way over gave and this person lost interest in me that really sunk it in deep for me. That was like a knife in my heart. It was like that that was like the hardest thing for me to absorb it was like that just crushed me you know? Because I met I was I've been dating people for a number of years and I was like I met somebody I really really liked and and they liked me as well. But what happened was I use words like they because if I post this they you say anything negative they they can make nightmares. But anyway so yeah that's how bad it is but you all let it happen. So going from that same standpoint I've been fighting this to the ground. So going from that standpoint yeah but this other person does it yeah they're putting themselves at risk. So basically what it is is that they didn't really like I'm looking at my life and I'm like all these other people who I'm seeing appreciate me because I'm not giving away my power and then this one person I have so much more in common with I'm giving away my power and I saw how much they didn't care and I remember I treat this person so well and I remember when the last time we were in each other's presence talking to each other or no maybe probably the second last time no maybe it was the last time. We're walking down the street and I say you know I don't know what'll happen with me or you but or with me and you but I hope that at least I you know I gave you a model that like you know men can be really good and that we can you know treat you know really treat you at like on a really high level because I felt proud of that I was like I really was proud of myself for how well I'd acted in that relationship and I remember this person said to me oh other people have treated me like this before. And I was like yeah I don't not I didn't mind like someone doesn't want to like date me or something that's fine like it's it's all good but it was just it wasn't I wasn't mad at them actually I was mad at myself. I was like I literally spent the last several months making this my top priority. Like they hit me up they needed Uber instant you know need a pick up instant like anything they need like like I might as well have just been called a VIP concierge at that point. And I just remember thinking like I'm dating all these other people who I just lay back I like call them at 2:00 in the morning and they come over and it's like epic. And then this is the person who's the least interested in me but it's someone who I'm the most interested in. Why is that? Because it's always the person that you like the most who you're the super committed to that you over give right? And then what winds up happening is that you push them away. So I pushed them away and probably harmed their life. But did she give anything back to you? Did I mean is I mean it wasn't like nothing but I'm just saying but I wanted I wanted like you know a long-term relationship. Like I wanted like a really deep relationship you know to build something together. I actually wanted that. If you had to say yeah now you would would you you would have made her invest more and it would have probably still I'm let's put it this way I wouldn't make anyone do anything but I would have provided the space. Yeah I just provide the space. I would have allowed the space. I would have I would have been aware that I'm not making us closer by behaving that manner. That's not making us get closer. That's pushing us apart. And if I would have just been the like and initially they were super invested. So literally all that I would have had to do was the SAME THING I ALWAYS DO. YOU KNOW IT'S like the same thing I've done all these times. I would have just done that done. Right and they were super invested at the start. I was the one more laid back and then I kind of got pulled into it. I liked their investment. I was actually kind of won over by their investment. But then you know how it's like a seesaw. It flips right? Because they were so good I was like oh I I really like that investment. So I love that and then it kind of you know I have a soft spot for that. So then I made more out of it than it was and then I that was a wake-up call for me. But it was something that really I actually I actually got over it very quick. Like when I saw I I I I just woke up one day and I could just see it so clearly. It was actually after that comment like I've been treated like this before and I was like it was just like it like it all just became clear and then and one sec and then I've never been treated like this before I haven't I have. Yeah oh I've been treated like this before. You know and that's impossible first of all because like the way that I you all know how I am right? Like when I get locked in on something I'm like tunnel vision you know? So this is me with complete utter tunnel vision for a long time. I'm actually glad that I got out of that cuz like if I'd stayed in it I probably would have just kept helping too much probably would have consumed too much of my time. So I'm actually glad that I got out of it. But every relationship after that now it's like the exact opposite of that. Like I'm like I'm like super chilled back. I leave a lot of space to invest. I just enjoy myself. I don't give a lot of thought to it and it's so different. one ever come back because she she really realized that no one did treat her as well as you? The funny thing is every single ex I've ever had has come back. Yeah and and and the thing is is in her case I didn't return the phone call because I knew it was I'm like a drug addict. At that point I'm like I'm literally like a drug addict. Like I'm like I like that I'm I'm too into this and like I'll I'll always over invest. Like I'm like I don't trust myself not to not to break that pattern of over caring. I just don't trust myself. So I just didn't return the phone call at that point. And uh yeah it it usually doesn't end too well for the other party in those cases because they had a good option and they didn't take it. So going from that standpoint no it was them who it was my it was my fault because I triggered what? What did I trigger by being over invested? What did I trigger? I triggered the RS flip. That's what it was they're not able to perceive what it was that was happening because I'm triggering the RS flip. This person did nothing wrong at all I was nothing but nice to me I'm the one who who was weird not them. Well do you think that over giving in some cases is actually beneficial because sometimes maybe you just want to filter out that person that's kind of like having an enormous amount of integrity and still support you? No because I've done all that it never works out. There's not a single case in my life in 42 years where I over gave and then the person's like thank you. It's always they think you're this big jerk because you attract the wrong type of person. You attract takers. You attract you you'll it's like you ever heard the the concept of turning a prince into a frog right? So it's um you'll take someone who even is good and you'll turn them negative by doing that. But again the big joke here is every taker who hears this is like that WAS THE MOST INSPIRING thing I ever heard. TAKE MORE. LIKE THAT'S LITERALLY HOW they think. So it's like it's it's unfortunate like you'll always see these courses of empaths that are looking to have a healthier ability to receive, but you'll never see a narcissist learning like taking the course on how to give more. You'll never see that. Like you always see empaths like like you'll never see a narcissist like how to be more of a giver and like a room full of narcissists like teach me or like a room full of sociopaths like how do I care? You know, but you'll see a lot of people that are that are over caring and you'll see them you'll see them um like in these classes of like how to like have boundaries and how to how to like receive more and you'll always know all the main codependency teachers, we all look the same. We have this very raw look of just being gutted. That's what every like like if you if you look at like if you look at Ross Rosenberg if you go if you see him, you can tell he's telling the truth. Like you can just see he's just been gutted. Like you can see like you can he looks like this war hardened veteran who just like over gave and he's just been gutted. I have a bit of that. Like you can tell I'm I'm I'm like a you know what they call that a a highly sensitive person. I have that. Like I really feel others pain and I really feel their like even from like earlier the question that you asked like I found a trick like that'll loop in my mind like I didn't tell them my love language. Oh, what if I hurt his feelings and like literally that will loop in my brain and loop in my brain and and it got to the point that my staff um a lot of my staff members would come to me and they would have to say to me like if you can't learn to fire people, I'm going to quit. Like a lot of my staff members came that did that for me or or would say that to me because literally I wouldn't fire anybody. People would steal stupid amounts of money and then and like my team would go to fire them. I'm like why are you doing that? Like probably we caused that by not being nice or something. Like I literally I was literally like that. It's because and give me one sec. It's because a healthy a healthy person it's like this is you and your space of health and like this is the behavior that you're cool with and at each here's what it is. At each you want to think of it like do you have a pencil or no? Okay. So you want to think of it like it's like here's here's you and your healthy space, right? And then that's like a boundary. And then what you want to have is like chunks of value on the outside like that. Okay? Little chunks of value. Now what that does, so that's the value, right? Why is that? Because if you don't have value on the outside, there's nothing to draw people to you, right? So the value here, let's say it's a bar club, it could be you're fun you make them laugh, you share stories, entertaining. You're not another one of those people like hi, what's your name? Where are you from? What do you do? You know, it's like you you're actually like good vibes, share stories, etc, right? Then from there, if they can if they enjoy that then what they get here is like a little bit of time, you know, maybe like some you know, jokes. You know? Maybe vibes. Then in here might be like you know, friendship. It's like upside down. Okay. Then from there could be like you know intimacy. I've I've never Okay. Okay. Then from there could be like seeing each other like a lot like dating. Then from there could be like you know, relationship. And at each level you give more value to each, right? And and you freely give value, but see what I would do is I would take all this and I would just put it all out here. And then now what is this? Empty. Empty. And then there's no stable structure there. It just unravels. There's nothing to receive. So you get the life sucked out of you. It will suck the life out of you. But a narcissist they would be and I've actually never drawn the narcissist so now this is my first time so bear with me. I'm I'm going to invent this. Let's see. Narcissist Okay. What that would be maybe I don't know like Yeah, it'd be like take then everybody runs away but then they still just try to grab it. You know, and just drag it in. And then I don't know. This would be like all like dense or something. But then like but then everything's trying to run away. Like everyone's like run. Run. Run. But whatever little bit they can get. And then of course like then there's like some stupid little codependent called Owen and I'm like they need help. It's not their fault. It's probably my fault. Then I like jump in AND THEY'RE LIKE SEE YEAH, I DON'T KNOW. MY MOM IS SO PROUD RIGHT NOW. This is going to be my first year yearbook. So yeah, so that's that's the idea of like giving and receiving, right? So really even a fuddle in say business is the same thing, right? It's like free video then maybe jump on an email list. Email list jump to a free event. Free event inexpensive event, right? So it's it's really that same pattern of like give give give give, but then also have a boundary. These faceless corporations, they just want to buy airtime and make you watch it not have to be human. They want to kind of take haha. Um and then people that are broke, they can never receive. And by the way, the spiritual community, it's so sad. So many of these people are so broke. The one person I know who's like crushing it is Aaron Doughty. You guys know my friend Aaron Doughty? He's epic, right? He makes great money. He could teach entrepreneurship. He's amazing. And so he's in the spiritual community and he makes money. But I remember I was doing World Summit in Vegas like 6, 7 years ago and there was this guy I won't say his name, but he does sound baths and this is before sound baths were even popular and he was running a sound bath. I said, "Hey, what could I what could I pay you to do a private sound bath at my event and you have to drive there with all your gear?" And he said $2,000. I felt so bad, but I gave him the 2K, but I felt really bad. I even gave him a big tip. He should have charged me 10 or 20K, but he only wanted 2K. He doesn't value himself. That's the thing. He doesn't value himself. Most what they'll teach you in business and entrepreneurship is most of you don't value yourself. That's the really big problem. But it's not just one sec. It's not just value yourself, it's also learning how to frame the deal. So that's the thing. So you've got to audit your value and then you've got to learn how to frame your value and then learn how to frame the deals. Does this make sense? You've got to learn how to frame the deal properly. So again, for me learning of thing about things like sales, that's a return to emotional health. That's really emotional health. Not me just saying, you know, like you've all seen it. I'll put out a 4-hour free video. I'll put out videos that caused me how many problems in my career that I put out, but I'm like they need to see it. I got to put out and I am proud of that, but do you know how much trouble that's caused me? And yet I still do it. I'm proud of that. You don't always throw out the baby with the bathwater. So I'm proud of what I've done. So a lot of what I've done has been out of wanting to give legacy, wanting to be heroic. Other parts of what I've done have been out of codependence. And a big part of this is you've got to separate the wheat from the chaff when you really audit yourself, what about you is you being a real giver and that's what you want to preserve and then what about you is where you're just being codependent. Where really you shouldn't have just given that away. You probably should have charged money for that. You should have had some kind of exchange for that. But again for some of you, you've got to learn to give more. There's some of you who I know in this audience who are like mega takers. I know a couple of you. They're mega takers. But all of you are hearing this. You're like I knew I need to take more. But a couple of you I know are mega takers. And then and and you need to learn how to give more. And then some of you in this room are mega givers and don't know how to receive. And these are the people that I meet that are so skilled, they're so talented. They could be very attractive to people they'd want to date and yet they're they're operating at a five to six out of 10 success level. It's really really sad. Highly talented, very smart, very talented and you see their income level and you're just like ouch. And you know it's that it's that spiritual thing of not knowing how to receive. But again that comes down to auditing because you don't just wake up and and be like I now value myself. Give me all the money. That's not going to do anything either. I mean maybe it could, but I mean it probably do somewhat better. But it's actually learning how to to then refine your skill sets. Like look like kind of niching down your skills and see see where what you have has value. Do you remember I said earlier like I had to re-audit my friendship with Julian as he became more became more of like in a father role and so on and so forth, right? And then find the value and rediscover that value. It's the same thing like you've got to look at what is that you're doing and you've got to drill down more to see where the actual value is. If that makes sense. Okay, I and so it basically means like to figure out what you're truly amazing at, you've got to drill drill drill drill drill drill drill drill drill. Get it to the point where like you can think of like this ultimate thing that you can do that is like the thing that nobody has or the thing that is very unique. So you've got to you've got to almost like you've got to refine it to where like a drop is like a pound. You know what I mean? Like the most densified version of like what it is that you are. And then what you do from there is then you learn how to present it and that's where you do sales and marketing. So tomorrow we will be doing sales and marketing. So this is that's this idea. Like what we learned today about motivation, about how to motivate yourself, sales and marketing is reverse motivation. But we've got to get you thinking about what's unique about you and then thinking about how to present that in a way that resonates. So remember, it's not just the shift in inner game, the inner game shift is half of it, but the other half of it is the outer game shift. Now, by the way, you want to know what it looks like? You want to know what it looks like when you don't have the inner game, but you only have the outer game? It looks like friends of mine who learn how to do sales, but when they go to close, their voice Now, my voice is very I've been speaking so long my voice is is trash. But, they uh they their voice tightens up on the close. Whenever you see me doing sales, does my voice tighten up? Do I get nervous? No. No. What do I look like when I'm doing sales? The same. Exactly the same. In fact, if anything, I look more excited cuz I want to help people. So, in my mind, I perceive it like I'm helping you if I do sales. But, for some people, they feel like they're taking. And so, they So, they're all confident right up until the point of sale, but they haven't done the inner game work and they crumble. This very, very big. But, then other people, they've got the inner game down like, "Yeah, I want the money." But, they don't know how to present it. They're just like, "Hey, I'm amazing and I love myself. What? Pay me." And that's not that's not good, either. "Why don't you want to get paid? So I can take a vacation. Pay me." Right? So, they don't understand the technique of it. So, to So, what I'm referring to here is the inner game of sales, the inner confidence of sales, and then at having those correct boundaries. And for any for the couple people in here who I know are more takers, also realize that you've got to give more because again, the giving I don't know where that was. But, anyway, the uh yeah. The giving is what attracts people in, right? The the uh I don't remember Oh, there it is. Yeah, the giving is what makes is what draws people to you. It makes them go to you. Right? Because what are we attracted to? The sun. Right? We're the sun. We're attracted to value. We're attracted to people who are attractive. We're attracted to um air. We're attracted to food. We're attracted to value, right? So, the value is what makes people attracted to you, but then you have to have a boundary. It's same thing when you go out to the bar club, you're talking to somebody, value, value, value, value, value, tease. Value, value, value, value, value, turn this way, revoking a value. You see that? It They need to feel some kind of a boundary. There has to be a boundary. If I just go like that, and there's no value, even though that's kind of funny. They're like, "Whatever, right?" If I'm just like Oh, no. like that, no boundary. Instead, fun, boundary. You see that? That's how it works. That's what adjusts the RAS. That's what makes the RAS flip in your favor. That's what makes the RAS flip in your favor. You have to If you don't understand that, the RAS has to flip in your favor. Look, if you're somebody like If their RAS flips in your favor, they look at you and they're like, "Confident, funny, charming, intelligent, witty, good energy, leader." When when when their RAS goes against you, it's like, "Hairy, stinky, ugly, weird, creepy." You're the same person. Every single what Every single thing I just said here applies to everyone in this room. Even the women. Also hairy. You know what I'm saying, right? They have to shave it. You know, so it's like So, literally, yeah. No, I mean, same with you, right? No, no. You Let's even go deeper. The whole frame that you have with that is is a frame that was imposed on you. You don't even realize that. Oh, yes. Frame of what? When you're seeing When you're When you're looking at someone who's very attractive and like, "Wow, I'd be getting lucky." You know, maybe you go to propose marriage, "They said yes." These are frames. These are frames. These are frames that are put on you. These are frames. It's It's RAS flipping you. It's what it is. Yep. Is this the same thing as like a push-pull dynamic, the uh Well, that's that's that is an example of where a boundary could occur. Yeah, in a playful way, yes. So, yeah. So, it's the thing is it's value plus boundary. Value plus boundary. Value plus boundary. Value plus boundary. Value plus boundary. It's always like that. But, again, you've got to know how to present that value. So, tomorrow, what we'll be looking at is we'll be looking at how to actually do sales. How to How to take what you have, how to audit it for the value, and present it. And let me give you a little tip as a preview. Go to If you want to see great sales, go to a tasting menu at a fine restaurant. And what they do is they bring it out and they say, "This fish was caught in the coast of Maine. It is with microgreens from the local Blackburn Farm. And a mustard seed from Saudi Arabia." Right? It's like, "Dude, shut up. It's a fish." But, they But, But, what they do is Even when I say that, you're like, "Fish from Maine? Microgreens from a local farm? Saudi Arabian mustard?" There's all these things about yourself that you don't know, that you've never audited, that if you just don't know how to flush them out, would be attractive and and be compelling to people. But, you don't know that. So, you've got to understand how to how to recognize where is somebody at as far as their investment, what are they willing to listen to at this time? Once you've got them to listen to that much, then how much do they listen to? Once they've listened to that much, then how much do they listen to? Once they've listened to that much, then how much do they listen to? Then they listen to that much, how much do they listen to? And and so on and so forth. And then going from that standpoint, then what you have um is that you can really, really engage with them, and you can engage them at a really high level. It's to the point that like as a teacher, I have enough tools to change somebody's life so dramatically, it is scary. But, I know that if I just present those tools flat out, the average person, it's too awesome. It's literally just too awesome. And so, it it has to be presented in a certain way that somebody's ready to get it. They're ready to receive it. Otherwise, it's like it's like it's just too beautiful and they can't process it. And I know that sounds crazy, but it's like if you found somebody who's homeless and you said, "Here, you know, let me let me move you into my house." You move them in your house, but then they're still smoking meth in the bathroom and getting in arguments. It's like it's too good. So, you So, you have to prepare them and and prepare their mind and prime their mind for that kind of a success. You've got to You've got to lay the foundation for success. Most of you in here are still learning how to lay that foundation for success. Most of you in here are about a two out of 10 for how much success foundation that you can have, even with us banging on you for days now. Banging on you, banging on you, banging on you, banging on you. And like we're just chipping away at it. But, my version of a 10 is very, very high. So, you know, but we're just banging on you, right? We're beginning to make you It's It's like uh Neo in The Matrix like he's starting to believe, you know, like he can fly, he can bend the spoon, but he's like, uh uh you know, right? And and he doesn't believe yet. So, it's like you know, we're kind of just banging on you here, right? And So, we're kind of, you know, putting you through this. I'm just getting you thinking about it. But, you'll see it like even as you start getting more and more success, your friends and family, you'll show them this stuff and you'll remember what I said. Like, you'll be like, "Look, try this." And they're like, "Uh no, that's stupid." Like that. Like cuz they're not mentally ready for it. And they're not invested. And they're not invested. They're not invested. You're going to see. Yeah, super It's like really crazy stuff. Okay. So, right now, it is um 1:00 in the morning, and uh I'm kind of timing my voice here to last election like barely to the end of the event. So, um I've got a couple people I'm going to take out tonight. You guys know who you are. And uh everybody else, I suggest either go out or go to bed would be another good idea. And tomorrow's going to be a very, very, very long day. It's going to be a lot of information. And we're going to be focused a lot on uh things like sales, like you said here, and also a lot of things like release work, and and about how to actually make inner shifts to where you even would be more open to that kind of success and laying more of that foundation. So, you guys have fun? Yes. Thank you very much for being here today. I REALLY APPRECIATE IT. NICE. THANKS, GUYS.